docs/groups.md, before:

---
summary: "Group chat behavior across surfaces (WhatsApp/Telegram/Discord/iMessage)"
read_when:
  - Changing group chat behavior or mention gating
---
# Groups

Clawdbot treats group chats consistently across surfaces: WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, iMessage.

## Session keys
- Group sessions use `surface:group:<id>` session keys (rooms/channels use `surface:channel:<id>`).
- Direct chats use the main session (or per-sender if configured).
- Heartbeats are skipped for group sessions.

## Display labels
- UI labels use `displayName` when available, formatted as `surface:<token>`.
- `#room` is reserved for rooms/channels; group chats use `g-<slug>` (lowercase, spaces -> `-`, keep `#@+._-`).

## Group policy (WhatsApp)
WhatsApp supports a `groupPolicy` config to control how group messages are handled:

```json5
{
  whatsapp: {
    allowFrom: ["+15551234567"],
    groupPolicy: "disabled"  // "open" | "disabled" | "allowlist"
  }
}
```

| Policy | Behavior |
|--------|----------|
| `"open"` | Default. Groups bypass `allowFrom`, only mention-gating applies. |
| `"disabled"` | Block all group messages entirely. |
| `"allowlist"` | Only allow group messages from senders listed in `allowFrom`. |

Note: `groupPolicy` is separate from `allowFrom` (which only filters DMs) and from mention-gating (which requires @mentions).

## Mention gating (default)
Group messages require a mention unless overridden per group. Defaults live per subsystem under `*.groups."*"`.

```json5
{
  whatsapp: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123@g.us": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  telegram: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123456789": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  imessage: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  routing: {
    groupChat: {
      mentionPatterns: ["@clawd", "clawdbot", "\\+15555550123"],
      historyLimit: 50
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `mentionPatterns` are case-insensitive regexes.
- Surfaces that provide explicit mentions still pass; patterns are a fallback.
- Mention gating is only enforced when mention detection is possible (native mentions or `mentionPatterns` are configured).
- Discord defaults live in `discord.guilds."*"` (overridable per guild/channel).

## Group allowlists
When `whatsapp.groups`, `telegram.groups`, or `imessage.groups` is configured, the keys act as a group allowlist. Use `"*"` to allow all groups while still setting default mention behavior.

## Activation (owner-only)
Group owners can toggle per-group activation:
- `/activation mention`
- `/activation always`

Owner is determined by `whatsapp.allowFrom` (or the bot’s self E.164 when unset). Other surfaces currently ignore `/activation`.

## Context fields
Group inbound payloads set:
- `ChatType=group`
- `GroupSubject` (if known)
- `GroupMembers` (if known)
- `WasMentioned` (mention gating result)

The agent system prompt includes a group intro on the first turn of a new group session.

## iMessage specifics
- Prefer `chat_id:<id>` when routing or allowlisting.
- List chats: `imsg chats --limit 20`.
- Group replies always go back to the same `chat_id`.

## WhatsApp specifics
See `docs/group-messages.md` for WhatsApp-only behavior (history injection, mention handling details).

Commit message:

feat(telegram): add groupPolicy config for group message filtering

docs/groups.md, after:

---
summary: "Group chat behavior across surfaces (WhatsApp/Telegram/Discord/iMessage)"
read_when:
  - Changing group chat behavior or mention gating
---
# Groups

Clawdbot treats group chats consistently across surfaces: WhatsApp, Telegram, Discord, iMessage.

## Session keys
- Group sessions use `surface:group:<id>` session keys (rooms/channels use `surface:channel:<id>`).
- Direct chats use the main session (or per-sender if configured).
- Heartbeats are skipped for group sessions.

## Display labels
- UI labels use `displayName` when available, formatted as `surface:<token>`.
- `#room` is reserved for rooms/channels; group chats use `g-<slug>` (lowercase, spaces -> `-`, keep `#@+._-`).

## Group policy (WhatsApp & Telegram)
Both WhatsApp and Telegram support a `groupPolicy` config to control how group messages are handled:

```json5
{
  whatsapp: {
    allowFrom: ["+15551234567"],
    groupPolicy: "disabled"  // "open" | "disabled" | "allowlist"
  },
  telegram: {
    allowFrom: ["77112533", "@username"],
    groupPolicy: "disabled"  // "open" | "disabled" | "allowlist"
  }
}
```

| Policy | Behavior |
|--------|----------|
| `"open"` | Default. Groups bypass `allowFrom`, only mention-gating applies. |
| `"disabled"` | Block all group messages entirely. |
| `"allowlist"` | Only allow group messages from senders listed in `allowFrom`. |

Notes:
- `groupPolicy` is separate from `allowFrom` (which only filters DMs) and from mention-gating (which requires @mentions).
- For Telegram `allowlist`, the sender can be matched by user ID (e.g., `"77112533"`) or username (e.g., `"@mneves"` or `"mneves"`).

## Mention gating (default)
Group messages require a mention unless overridden per group. Defaults live per subsystem under `*.groups."*"`.

```json5
{
  whatsapp: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123@g.us": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  telegram: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123456789": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  imessage: {
    groups: {
      "*": { requireMention: true },
      "123": { requireMention: false }
    }
  },
  routing: {
    groupChat: {
      mentionPatterns: ["@clawd", "clawdbot", "\\+15555550123"],
      historyLimit: 50
    }
  }
}
```

Notes:
- `mentionPatterns` are case-insensitive regexes.
- Surfaces that provide explicit mentions still pass; patterns are a fallback.
- Mention gating is only enforced when mention detection is possible (native mentions or `mentionPatterns` are configured).
- Discord defaults live in `discord.guilds."*"` (overridable per guild/channel).

## Group allowlists
When `whatsapp.groups`, `telegram.groups`, or `imessage.groups` is configured, the keys act as a group allowlist. Use `"*"` to allow all groups while still setting default mention behavior.

## Activation (owner-only)
Group owners can toggle per-group activation:
- `/activation mention`
- `/activation always`

Owner is determined by `whatsapp.allowFrom` (or the bot’s self E.164 when unset). Other surfaces currently ignore `/activation`.

## Context fields
Group inbound payloads set:
- `ChatType=group`
- `GroupSubject` (if known)
- `GroupMembers` (if known)
- `WasMentioned` (mention gating result)

The agent system prompt includes a group intro on the first turn of a new group session.

## iMessage specifics
- Prefer `chat_id:<id>` when routing or allowlisting.
- List chats: `imsg chats --limit 20`.
- Group replies always go back to the same `chat_id`.

## WhatsApp specifics
See `docs/group-messages.md` for WhatsApp-only behavior (history injection, mention handling details).
